# Personal-Data-Manifesto

Data is often regarded as a purely objective, unbiased descriptor. There’s no way that your opinion can change the number of pigeons in the barn. You can’t persuade a graph to show an upward trend if the numbers are going down. But this blind confidence can corrupt analyses based on the assumption that the data is complete, unbiased, and fundamentally true. The number of pigeons in the barn can be counted in a variety of ways, divided among pigeonholes to create a desired visual, or even taken out of the barn and brought back in to be counted again. Faith in the sanctity of data can undermine any conclusion- first and foremost data science requires a skeptical approach, trusting no one but yourself and no one's numbers but your own.

	Many fields of science regard data as the bottom of the pyramid. Data is synthesized to information, information with context becomes knowledge, and the application of that knowledge becomes wisdom.
However, a data scientist's work starts one step lower. Data has to come from somewhere, and it is the responsibility of the data scientist to ensure that the data is as accurate and complete a representation of the topic as possible. A dataset may contain facts, but is it really complete if it didn’t have a control group? Historical trends? Sometimes even just omitted variables - a dataset of lung cancer deaths that doesn't track cigarette smoking might lead a scientist (who blindly trusts the dataset to represent a complete picture of the situation) to conclude that shorthair cats are the leading cause of lung cancer. The professional data scientist’s mission should always be to understand the whole situation, the significant and insignificant factors, and to the best of their ability create a comprehensive and thorough dataset, or documentation of where it was not possible. 
